# An adaptive strategy in modern times

Natural environments are limited in food-resources, and food-seeking behavior
results from an adaptation to such environments. If the characteristic property
is scarcity, then animals should approach cues with the highest associative
strength to actual food-resources, this approach
[@B8QZIGEN#Montague_Dayan_Sejnowski_1996] suggests that prediction error signal
if the current state is better or worse than expected, so animals should prefer
options with the highest expected value [@8Q6QHXGB#Kacelnik_Bateson_1996].
However, uncertainty is food delivery increases lever pressing, and reduces time
latency to approach lever [@S8CHV5KG#Anselme_Robinson_Berridge_2013]. Creating
intermittent access to high fat diets generates binge eating behavior
[@QN55S25U#Hess_Etal_2019; @CTAFJAZ3#King_Etal_2016;
@MBZJPLN3#Lardeux_Kim_Nicola_2013], increases reinforcement value upon withdrawl
[@BDVQLHQZ#Mcgee_Etal_2010] and operant behavior without withdrawl
[@8KGR8TT6#Wojnicki_Babbs_Corwin_2013; @DQHTA2QH#Wojnicki_Stine_Corwin_2007;
@WPLVSADN#Wojnicki_Etal_2015], psychomotor behavior
[@GIDJCJMP#Hardaway_Etal_2016], DA and Ach release
[@23K7IPBA#Rada_Avena_Hoebel_2005]. Mainly because of logistic reasons
intermittent access is provided at the same time of days (in most cases), and
that allows animals to accurately predict arrival of food, although with some
inconsistencies within animals [@KUXWM8W5#Luby_Etal_2012]. However, the
behavioral effects, except anticipatory behavior, are common if intermittent
access is completly random or given a certain times of the day
[@VY8ZEZB6#Mu√±ozEscobar_GuerreroVargas_Escobar_2019].

Intermittent feeding schedules, and in general uncertainty of food-access
disrupts eating patterns. Food-seeking behavior is increased to avoid starvation
when a food shortage is predicted, and as previously noted this derives in
increasing exploration, amount of foraging bouts and time expended in foraging
[@G83L8BXA#Harris_Chapman_Monfort_2010]. This could be translated to the concept
of food insecurity, which defines the perception on how secure food access is
[@WZS8BTVL#Dhurandhar_2016], which is positively correlated with positive energy
balance [@WZS8BTVL#Dhurandhar_2016], increasing preference for high-fat
alternative [@EER2TNCJ#Nettle_Andrews_Bateson_2017] which corresponds to food of
cheap access in developed countries were this effect is more pronounced
[@4LJKTR3N#Moradi_Etal_2019] in females [@2N6SBNMK#Dinour_Bergen_Yeh_2007;
@VDHUFYYV#Nettle_Bateson_2019]. The strategy responsible for overweight in
food-insecure individuals is to overeat fats and carbohydarates in periods of high food availability [@2ZRH7IWR#Stinson_Etal_2018].

In modern urban environments high-fat food are of easy access, coupled with a
food-seeking behavior which seeks to maximize energetic gain, when food shortage
is predicted due to food-access uncertainty, can create overweight in the
population beacause the mechanism is adapted to low resource environments,
however in developed countries caloric density is extremely high, so increasing
food-seeking behavior results in excesive caloric intake. In the following
section we present orexin as a potential mediator of uncertainty-driven foraging
because of its pivotal role in both reactive and predictive homeostatic control
[@52DV95LU#Burdakov_2020], and motivated behavior
[@2X7SNKS3#Tyree_Borniger_DeLecea_2018].
