## Foraging and uncertainty

Certain food-seeking strategies, such as the Lévy-Walks, emerge product of the
irreducible uncertainty the animal faces when foraging. Uncertainty then
informs food-seeking behavior. However, how animals capture o process this
uncertainty while searching for food has not yet been explained, such is the
aim of this section.

If an animal perform any food-seeking strategy in a specific area of the
environment there exists a probability of having success, which is dependent on
resource density and the specific strategy. Fixing the strategy, the
probability is determined by the resource density, moreover, as the resource
density changes over time so does the probability of successfuly obtaining
food. Moreover, in conjuntion with limited perceptual abilities
[@9XCDNBAM#Bartumeus_Etal_2016 ], the environment appears as being of
stochastic nature [@DIMJNJV2#Caraco_Etal_1990].

An animal which does not consider environment stochastic nature in its
food-seeking behavior will act greedely upon sampled values. Acting greedely
implies that the animal will always choose the option that yielded the most
values in a initial random sampling. Thus, acting greedely is analogous to
neglecting that the sample comes from a stochastic distributions of rewards,
this is problematic as it makes food-seeking strategy insensitive to reward
variation [@2BEHEM7X#Sutton_Barto_2018]. One could relax this assumption and
propose that animals will act upon the mean rewards such as the classical model
by @ESYGCSLH#Charnov_1976, which determines the strategy based on current patch
value against the global mean of the environment. Nevertheless, such rule-based
models do not provide good fit to behavioral data [@GC6MVWQU#Nonacs_2001;
@9XVRLKC3#LeHeron_Etal_2020; @RR87DVIX#Pyke_2010;
@H9JQCFZA#Hayden_Pearson_Platt_2011].

The competing models to rule-based ones are those which effectively consider
uncertainty into its formulation. However, for this to make biological sense,
animals should be able to specifically track uncertainty measures. Risk
considers the spread of possible outcomes, or similarly, the standar deviation
of the expected outcome [@VACKG3ZK#Rothwell_Stock_1988], in humans risk is
readily tracked in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
[@GLI8DY99#Christopoulos_Etal_2009]. Moreover, ACC tracks risk in a
context-dependent fashion, that is, it considers cue-related information to
determine the risk and expected value of a given option
[@5ANLDC83#VanHolstein_Floresco_2020]. While risk is the component of
uncertainty that measures the spread of outcome, volatility signifies how often
an environment changes its contingencies, for example, in the action and
outcome probability pairing. In learning tasks ACC activity is increases when
task volatility increases [@BHR2NAEI#Behrens_Etal_2007]. The main goal of
tracking uncertainty is to augment the chance of success while searching for
food. In that regard, being able to filter out uncertainty regarding outcomes
can prove to be benefitial as the true outcome prediction does not become
affected by noise. @X6XAHBZA#Stolyarova_Izquierdo_2017 showed that rats are
able to optimally choose options with larger value (mean reward waiting time)
despite large associated variability. Furthermore, lesions in the orbito
frontal cortex (OFC) showed an impaired ability to change preference when the
mean rewards were up or downshifted, that is, value inference became noisy.

All previously mentioned aspects of uncertainty can be categorized within the
notion of expected and unexpected uncertainty. @4BJ2B6KB#Yu_Dayan_2005 proposed
expected uncertainty as the uncertainty regarding outcomes when contingencies
(outcome given a certain action) remain stable but are subject to some noise,
whereas unexpected uncertainty represents a drastic change in the contigencies
that likely reflects an structural change in the environment. For example,
@X6XAHBZA#Stolyarova_Izquierdo_2017 experiment measured rat behavioral
modulation with expected uncertainty, and @BHR2NAEI#Behrens_Etal_2007 showed
ACC activity increases in the case of unexpected uncertainty. Considering both
kinds of uncertainties enables the animal to balance top-down and bottom-up
information, if the obtained rewards present some variation is should not
modify learned contigencies that maps actions with rewards in a given
environment, so top-down control should have dominance over bottom-up input. On
the other hand, if obtained rewards present a large amount of variation, the
balance should switch in order to prioritize bottom-up input to increase
learning about new contingencies [@4BJ2B6KB#Yu_Dayan_2005;
@P2FYNJKR#Soltani_Izquierdo_2019].

@4BJ2B6KB#Yu_Dayan_2005 dual notion of uncertainty can be considered in terms of
stationary and non-stationary environments. A non-stationary environment is one
where the outcome variance remain unchanges, whereas non-stationary present a
variable variance [@UJSWSGH3#Wu_Iyer_Wang_2018]. Thus, non-stationary
environments should be the only cause of unexpected uncertainty, and stationary
environments should only have expected uncertainty. However, humans while being
subject only to expected uncertainty typically behave as the environment were
non-stationary, and thus able to produce unexpected uncertainties
[@77AMCAE4#Ryali_Reddy_Yu_2016]. While the functional reasons behind this
behaviors are not clear, it has been proposed that this emerge because
sustatining the belief that environments are non-stationary does not prove to
be problematic in stationary ones [@77AMCAE4#Ryali_Reddy_Yu_2016] or because
stochasticity in decisions may provide a sufficient heuristic in many natural
environments [@ERS4UNTK#Reverdy_Srivastava_Leonard_2014].

Under non-stationary environments contingencies change, so animals are faced
with the dilema of either exploiting or exploring
[@2BEHEM7X#Sutton_Barto_2018]. Exploiting means that behavior should be
consistent with previously learned reward contingencies, on the other hand,
exploring tries to re-sample the environment to improve or re-learn current
contingencies. The exploitation-exploration balance has been linked to the
expected and unexpected uncertainty [@T3QJH2AJ#Cohen_Mcclure_Yu_2007], as
unexpected uncertainty should increase exploratory behavior to boost learning
of new contingencies, whereas if only expected uncertainty is present behavior
should exploit current knowledge. However, exploration could be triggered by
'boredom' when environment properties are extensible learned
[@LEWESIS6#AstonJones_Cohen_2005].

Here we briefly exposed the different environmental properties food-seeking
behavior is subject to in order to generate good strategies and maximize gain.
We proposed that natural environments are inherently stochastic, and animals
adapted to sense various aspects of uncertainty regarding their actions within
the environment. However, such a pivotal importance of uncertainty in
food-seeking behavior could be contested when considering perceptual abilities
as the primary means of informing foraging.

Perceptual abilities are always limited in some regard, and such limitation can
be regarded as the perceptual range of a given animal
[@C377F7EP#Fletcher_Etal_2013]. If an animal must know what is beyond such
perceptual range displacement is needed. However, to inform such displacement
memory, perceptual information integration, or some other strategy should come
into play. In many classical models lies the assumption than animals can
somehow integrate information about resource quality and distribution into a
environment mean [@ESYGCSLH#Charnov_1976]. However, perceptual omniscience is
not the case, and integration of environmental information is dependent on
times, so including non-local information (outside perceptual range) such as
resources gradients prove useful for the foraging animal
[@LDCMV4VS#Fagan_Etal_2017].

Even when local and non-local information can improve foraging sucess, there is
still an issue on how perceptual information behaves regarding movement and
spatial distance. The speed-perception tradeoff describes how perceptual
abilities are degraded as speed is increased
[@KU6TMHRT#Campos_Bartumeus_Méndez_2013], and as rapid approaching speeds are
required to capture prey or obtain food-resources while relying on local
perceptual inforamtion [@LDCMV4VS#Fagan_Etal_2017] this tradeoff present an
issue to food-seeking behavior. Moreover, the intensive-extensive tradeoff
points how finding food-resource nearby impairs finding resources far-away
[@VYE5NZFU#Raposo_Etal_2011; @9XCDNBAM#Bartumeus_Etal_2016 ]. Both tradeoffs
imply that in order to properly obtain knowledge about the environment, and
actually achieve success in obtaining food lead to perceptual uncertainty and
require a fine balance between exploration and exploitation.

In order to deal with such tradeoffs animals stablish two distinct behavioral
modes: (a) local search, and (b) relocation. Local search is predominantly
informed by perceptual information, while the relocation behavior show signs of
a stochastic process with Lévy-like distributions [@W7DBK8JN#Bazazi_Etal_2012].
While there has been discussion of brownian-like random movements guiding local
search, this is most likely a emergent property caused by frequent food
encounters [@HJIF9SNA#DeJager_Etal_2014], so this shifts from a random
relocation process to a perceptually guided local search, are in part result of
an increased frequency of food encounters. Thus, the overall food-seeking
strategy derives from a combination of random and perceptually informed
movements [@KCAKLD2E#Balogh_Etal_2020].

Given the limitation in perceptual abilities uncertainty seems to be
innescapable. Even when a experienced animal can integrate optimal foraging
paths in non-stationary environments, random searched with distinct cycles of
exploration/exploitation phases persist [@GNGBMVLA#Kembro_Etal_2019].
Furthermore, introducing stochasticity in food-seeking behavior improves
success as makes strategies more resilient to cognitive errors derived from
perception [@YTHQBTQH#Campos_Etal_2020]. The persistance of strategies that
permits the balance between exploitation, exploration and relocation
[@KU6TMHRT#Campos_Bartumeus_Méndez_2013], even when they are not technically
needed [@77AMCAE4#Ryali_Reddy_Yu_2016] shows how relevant is uncertainty in the
development of food-seeking behavior. In this section we presented how
stochastic properties of the environment lead to behavioral adaptations to deal
with the resultant uncertainty, by favoring strategies that favor reduction of
uncertainty [@QAN6C9AM#Peters_Mcewen_Friston_2017]. In the next section we will
examine models that consider the case of foraging in uncertain
environments, which inform about the underlying processes in food-seeking
behavior.
