# Orexin as a potential mediator of uncertainty-drive foraging

## The orexin peptides and orexin/dynorphin neurons

Animals respond to the environment by seeking to preserve certain physiological
parameters within a normal range, this homeostatic process is highly adaptive
and can generate transient changes [@7BNMJXRJ#Davies_2016]. The hypothalamus
comes as a relevant structure in the homeostatic process, by being capable of
controlling arousal levels [@3ZQDGXXZ#Adamantidis_Carter_DeLecea_2010;
@HQFDMJJ8#Kosse_Burdakov_2014], motivation for food intake
[@6FUPLHIJ#Castro_Berridge_2017], receiving internal status information of fat
deposits via leptin signaling [@RWABER6F#Pandit_Beerens_Adan_2017;
@DHNLNHHI#Meister_2000], and gastrointestinal status via ghrelin
[@NRWCYJCX#Müller_Etal_2015; @W3IUQNUY#Toshinai_Etal_2003]. Together this
functionality takes the hypothalamus to a pivotal rol in the homeostatis
process, specifically relating to controlling food intake.

Orexin or hypocretin is a neuropeptide with few neurons producing it most of
them located within the lateral hypothalamus and perifornical area, but with
large projections throught the brain [@EFWJQ65B#Chowdhury_Etal_2019]. Its
functions range from regulating sleep/wakefulness states
[@AR3R5QLP#Chemelli_Etal_1999] and energetic balance
[@KPIHYUYF#Yamanaka_Etal_2003]. Thus lateral hypothalamus orexin neurons are in
a well suited spot to control foraging-related behaviors. Orexin activity
promotes locomotory activity but its rapidly inhibited upon contact with food
[@7GXEINLY#González_Etal_2016], activity increases upon sucrose predictive cues
[@PIJIVQER#Hassani_Etal_2016], and in certain subpopulation the increased
spontaneus physical activity is directed towards food sources
[@Y4UZKQ5V#Zink_Etal_2018]. Thus, orexin-related activity can be interpreted as
food procuring [@Y4UZKQ5V#Zink_Etal_2018], futher support for this
interpretation come from orexin increasing olfactory activity
[@X9STRHXX#PrudHomme_Etal_2009], enhancing visual attention
[@7ZXMSXYC#Zajo_Fadel_Burk_2016], impairment of spatial working memory in orexin
knockout mice [@Z2G6BP2E#Dang_Etal_2018], among others that has been classified
as foraging-related behavior by @LBGV5NJ5#Barson_2020.

Orexin role in food-seeking behavior is not sufficient to suggest its role in
uncertainty-driven food-seeking behavior, however its connectivity to VTA, LC
and basal forebrain [@PQWIJHAP#Siegel_2004] which corresponds to inputs into DA,
Ach and NE activity, respectively, might hint orexin role in promoting
food-seeking behavior for prediction-error derived uncertainty, expected and
unexpected uncertainty. VTA projects glutamatergic inputs into the nucleus
accumbens shell, specifically into parvalbumin GABAergic interneurons,
activation of such neurons results in inhibited medium spiny neurons activity
into the lateral hypothalamus [@IUF535G9#Qi_Etal_2016], this connections are
known to be inhibitory [@TIF7X9CT#O’Connor_Etal_2015;
@M2RERH96#PerezLeighton_Etal_2017], and input inhibition increases lateral
hypothalamus activity [@VD2436JM#Stratford_Kelley_1999;
@ZCDTXFJI#Gutierrez_Etal_2011]. Furthermore, as we mentioned in previous
sections DA activity in VTA is related to environmental uncertainty, which could
increase lateral hypothalamus activity through dopaminergic inputs to the
supramammilary nucleus [@4SMCFQII#Plaisier_Hume_Menzies_2020], and indirect
action by orexin derived increased firing in VTA, that further inhibit nucleus
accumbens shell. This could result in a net increase of food-seeking behavior
via uncertainty augmented activity in the VTA.

Orexin signal depolarizes LC increasing its firing [@A5ZYWRZW#Hagan_Etal_1999],
which can promote task disengagement [@KA4Y29AG#Kane_Etal_2017], alter network
representation of tasks [@GFA24ABK#Grella_Etal_2019], and update world models
[@TA5KB3TF#Sales_Etal_2019], likely via promotion of exploratory behavior
related to tonic firing [@LEWESIS6#AstonJones_Cohen_2005]. These data support
the integration of orexin with unexpected uncertainty and exploration. Orexin
also synapse on cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain, promoting
acethylcholine release, which also creates excitatory influence on orexin
neurons generating a positive feedback circuit [@A93676U3#Sakurai_Etal_2005].
Cholinergic basal forebrain activity encodes valence-free prediction error
[@D8EGNYCV#Sturgill_Etal_2020], so DA and Ach could generate similar
uncertainty-drive excitation of orexin neurons. However, Ach activity might be
related to reducing the effects of prediction error in learning by singaling a
smaller variance [@S3YZPJJI#Puigbò_Etal_2020; @4BJ2B6KB#Yu_Dayan_2005] similar
to expected uncertainty signaling.

In this section we provided a plausible circuit were orexin activity acts as a
hub relating, prediction error, unexpected uncertainty and expected uncertainty.
This puts orexin as a candidate neuropeptide for dealing with uncertainty-driven
food-seeking behavior as it can both integrate environmenta and internal status
information, and promote locomotor activity to procure food. We derived this
function taking theoretical and empirical finding from foraging theory,
computational models of reinforcement learning and literature on homeostatic
control of food intake, allowing us to propose a functional role for orexin
situated in the proper evolutionary and environmental context.

