# Theoretical and empirical framework

## The natural setting for food-seeking behavior

Foraging comprises the complete set of activities and behaviors related to
obtaining food in a wild environment. Food-seeking behavior is a particular
element of such a set, including all re-orientation and locomotion activity
related to the obtention of food. Thus, food-seeking behavior considers up to
food encounter, whereas foraging behavior is still present in future utilization
of acquired energy, including feeding or possibly hoarding
[@V3Z2UVAU#Kramer_2001].

The food-seeking phase of foraging must ensure an optimal way to acquire food
using the least amount of resources and reduce exposure to potential predators.
If the food-resources location were static, food-seeking behavior only necessary
input would be an initial sampling of the environment and then matching
landscape cues. This is not the case. Animals do not necessarily follow
landscape cues [@9XCDNBAM#Bartumeus_Etal_2016], or even develop search
strategies based on them [@BWKDXXFW#Kölzsch_Etal_2015]. Moreover, animals are
subject to incomplete knowledge about resource location, quality, and
probability of obtention [@ZD73QGIR#Pyke_1984 ]. Thus a foraging animal must
determine its food-seeking behavior considering an inherently stochastic
environment with only partial knowledge.

In a stochastic environment, to establish optimal food-seeking strategies, animals should consider the overall statistical properties of the environment. Otherwise, local environment volatility could lead to the misguided preference for lower mean quality food resources with high variability, leading to starvation in the long run. Empirical evidence has shown that multiple animal species, including humans, perform searching in a Lévy-walk fashion [@7YQKP7Z2#Garg_Kello_2021; @I2BS842S#Reynolds_Etal_2018; @TPRPLPEC#Viswanathan_Etal_1996; @BWKDXXFW#Kölzsch_Etal_2015]. Lévy-walks are random walks with a Lévy distribution, which produces heavy-tails and describes multiple concentrated movements with sharp turning angles followed by few ballistic displacements; such patterns produce optimal searches in various environments with dispersed resources in a patchy-fashion [@97UESCC6#Wosniack_Etal_2017]. Although its generative mechanism is not precise [@I2BS842S#Reynolds_Etal_2018] there is evidence that this mechanism is partially independent of sensory information [@M5RXPXSZ#Humphries_Sims_2014; @5WUMQR2H#Sims_Etal_2019], probably selected through evolution as it optimizes food searching with partial or complete lack of knowledge [@97UESCC6#Wosniack_Etal_2017].

Given that these food-seeking strategies are present without sensory information and are ubiquitous in animals, food-seeking behavior probably evolved to deal with partial knowledge in an uncertain environment. While Lévy-walks provide a 'basal' strategy when there is partial or no knowledge, upon food encounter, the search strategy switches to a more focused one similar to Brownian-motion [@5KMWW8NS#Reynolds_Frye_2007; @F9HICU4A#Nauta_Khaluf_Simoens_2020]. Furthermore, computational modeling points out how this switch between informed (Brownian-like) and random search might depend on food encounter uncertainty [@3YWCKUUK#Anselme_Otto_Güntürkün_2017]. Together this data suggests that animal's food-seeking behavior evolved to deal with uncertain environments and partial knowledge. Moreover, environment uncertainty itself modulates the baseline strategy, optimally searching for food even when knowledge is not complete.

## Foraging and uncertainty

Specific food-seeking strategies, such as the Lévy-Walks, emerge from the animal's irreducible uncertainty when foraging. Uncertainty then informs food-seeking behavior. However, how animals capture o process this uncertainty while searching for food has not yet been explained; such is the aim of this section.

If an animal performs any food-seeking strategy in a specific area of the environment, there is a probability of success, depending on resource density and the specific strategy. With a fixed trategy, resource density determines the probability. Moreover, as the resource density changes over time, so does the probability of successfully obtaining food. Moreover, in conjunction with limited perceptual abilities [@9XCDNBAM#Bartumeus_Etal_2016 ], the environment appears as being of stochastic nature [@DIMJNJV2#Caraco_Etal_1990].

An animal that does not consider environment stochastic nature in its food-seeking behavior will act greedily upon sampled values. Acting greedily implies that the animal will always choose the option that yielded the most values in an initial random sampling. Thus, acting greedily is analogous to neglecting that the sample comes from a stochastic distribution of rewards. This is problematic as it makes food-seeking strategy insensitive to reward variation [@2BEHEM7X#Sutton_Barto_2018]. One could relax this assumption and propose that animals act upon the mean rewards, such as the classical model by @ESYGCSLH#Charnov_1976, which determines the strategy based on the current patch value against the global mean of the environment. Nevertheless, such rule-based models do not provide good fit to behavioral data [@GC6MVWQU#Nonacs_2001; @9XVRLKC3#LeHeron_Etal_2020; @RR87DVIX#Pyke_2010; @H9JQCFZA#Hayden_Pearson_Platt_2011].

The competing models to rule-based ones are those which effectively consider uncertainty into its formulation. However, for this to make biological sense, animals should be able to track uncertainty measures precisely. Risk considers the spread of possible outcomes, or similarly, the standard deviation of the expected outcome [@VACKG3ZK#Rothwell_Stock_1988]. In humans, the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) tracks risk [@GLI8DY99#Christopoulos_Etal_2009]. Moreover, ACC tracks risk in a context-dependent fashion; that is, it considers cue-related information to determine the risk and expected value of a given option [@5ANLDC83#VanHolstein_Floresco_2020]. While risk is the component of uncertainty that measures the spread of outcome, volatility signifies how often an environment changes its contingencies, for example, in the action and outcome probability pairing. In learning tasks,  volatility increases ACC activity [@BHR2NAEI#Behrens_Etal_2007]. The main goal of tracking uncertainty is to augment the chance of success while searching for food. In that regard, filtering out uncertainty regarding outcomes can prove beneficial as the actual outcome prediction does not become affected by noise. @X6XAHBZA#Stolyarova_Izquierdo_2017 showed that rats could optimally choose options with more significant value (mean reward waiting time) despite large associated variability. Furthermore, lesions in the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) showed an impaired ability to change preference when the mean rewards were up or downshifted; that is, value inference became noisy.

All previously mentioned aspects of uncertainty can be categorized within the notion of expected and unexpected uncertainty. @4BJ2B6KB#Yu_Dayan_2005 proposed expected uncertainty as the uncertainty regarding outcomes when contingencies (outcome given a particular action) remain stable but are subject to some noise. In contrast, unexpected uncertainty represents a drastic change in the contingencies that likely reflects a structural change in the environment. For example, @X6XAHBZA#Stolyarova_Izquierdo_2017 experiment measured rat behavioral modulation with expected uncertainty, and @BHR2NAEI#Behrens_Etal_2007 showed ACC activity increases in the case of unexpected uncertainty. Considering both kinds of uncertainties enables the animal to balance top-down and bottom-up information if the obtained rewards present some variation is should not modify learned contingencies that maps actions with rewards in a given environment, so top-down control should dominate bottom-up input. On the other hand, if obtained rewards present a large amount of variation, the balance should switch in order to prioritize bottom-up input to increase learning about new contingencies [@4BJ2B6KB#Yu_Dayan_2005; @P2FYNJKR#Soltani_Izquierdo_2019].

@4BJ2B6KB#Yu_Dayan_2005 dual notion of uncertainty can be considered in terms of stationary and non-stationary environments. A non-stationary environment is one where the outcome variance remains unchanged, whereas non-stationary presents a variable variance [@UJSWSGH3#Wu_Iyer_Wang_2018]. Thus, non-stationary environments should be the only cause of unexpected uncertainty, and stationary environments should only have expected uncertainty. However, while being subject only to expected uncertainty, humans typically behave as the environment were non-stationary, thus producing unexpected uncertainties [@77AMCAE4#Ryali_Reddy_Yu_2016]. While the functional reasons behind these behaviors are not clear, it has been proposed that this emerge because sustaining the belief that environments are non-stationary does not prove to be problematic in stationary ones [@77AMCAE4#Ryali_Reddy_Yu_2016] or because stochasticity in decisions may provide a sufficient heuristic in many natural environments [@ERS4UNTK#Reverdy_Srivastava_Leonard_2014].

Under non-stationary environments, contingencies change, so animals are faced with the dilemma of either exploiting or exploring [@2BEHEM7X#Sutton_Barto_2018]. Exploiting means that behavior should be consistent with previously learned reward contingencies. On the other hand, exploring tries to re-sample the environment to improve or re-learn current contingencies. The exploitation-exploration balance has been linked to the expected and unexpected uncertainty [@T3QJH2AJ#Cohen_Mcclure_Yu_2007], as unexpected uncertainty should increase exploratory behavior to boost learning of new contingencies, whereas if only expected uncertainty is present, behavior should exploit current knowledge. However, exploration could be triggered by 'boredom' when environment properties are extensible learned [@LEWESIS6#AstonJones_Cohen_2005].

Here we briefly exposed the different environmental properties of food-seeking behavior to generate good strategies and maximize gain. We proposed that natural environments are inherently stochastic, and animals adapted to sense various aspects of uncertainty regarding their actions within the environment. However, such pivotal importance of uncertainty in food-seeking behavior could be contested when considering perceptual abilities as the primary means of informing foraging.

Perceptual abilities are always limited in some regard, and such limitation can be regarded as the perceptual range of a given animal [@C377F7EP#Fletcher_Etal_2013]. If an animal must know what is beyond such perceptual range, displacement is needed. However, to inform such displacement memory, perceptual information integration or other strategies should come into play. In many classical models, animals can somehow integrate information about resource quality and distribution into an environment mean [@ESYGCSLH#Charnov_1976]. However, perceptual omniscience is not the case, and integration of environmental information is dependent on times, so including non-local information (outside perceptual range) such as resource gradients prove helpful for the foraging animal [@LDCMV4VS#Fagan_Etal_2017].

Even when local and non-local information can improve foraging success, there is still an issue on how perceptual information behaves regarding movement and spatial distance. The speed-perception tradeoff describes how perceptual abilities are degraded as speed is increased [@KU6TMHRT#Campos_Bartumeus_Méndez_2013], and as rapid approaching speeds are required to capture prey or obtain food resources while relying on local perceptual information [@LDCMV4VS#Fagan_Etal_2017] this tradeoff present an issue to food-seeking behavior. Moreover, the intensive-extensive tradeoff points how finding food-resource nearby impairs finding resources far-away [@VYE5NZFU#Raposo_Etal_2011; @9XCDNBAM#Bartumeus_Etal_2016 ]. Both tradeoffs imply that in order to properly obtain knowledge about the environment and actually achieve success in obtaining food leads to perceptual uncertainty and requires a fine balance between exploration and exploitation.

In order to deal with such tradeoffs, animals establish two distinct behavioral modes: (a) local search and (b) relocation. Local search is predominantly informed by perceptual information, while the relocation behavior show signs of a stochastic process with Lévy-like distributions [@W7DBK8JN#Bazazi_Etal_2012]. While there has been discussion of Brownian-like random movements guiding local search, this is most likely an emergent property caused by frequent food encounters [@HJIF9SNA#DeJager_Etal_2014], so this shifts from a random relocation process to a perceptually guided local search, are in part result of an increased frequency of food encounters. Thus, the overall food-seeking strategy derives from a combination of random and perceptually informed movements [@KCAKLD2E#Balogh_Etal_2020].

Given the limitation in perceptual abilities, uncertainty seems to be inescapable. Even when an experienced animal can integrate optimal foraging paths in non-stationary environments, random searches with distinct cycles of exploration/exploitation phases persist [@GNGBMVLA#Kembro_Etal_2019]. Furthermore, introducing stochasticity in food-seeking behavior improves success as it makes strategies more resilient to cognitive errors derived from perception [@YTHQBTQH#Campos_Etal_2020]. The persistence of strategies that permits the balance between exploitation, exploration, and relocation [@KU6TMHRT#Campos_Bartumeus_Méndez_2013], even when they are not technically needed [@77AMCAE4#Ryali_Reddy_Yu_2016] shows how relevant is uncertainty in the development of food-seeking behavior. In this section, we presented how stochastic properties of the environment lead to behavioral adaptations to deal with the resultant uncertainty by favoring strategies that favor the reduction of uncertainty [@QAN6C9AM#Peters_Mcewen_Friston_2017]. In the next section, we will examine models that consider the case of foraging in uncertain environments, which informs about the underlying processes in food-seeking behavior.
