# Theoretical and empirical framework

## The natural setting for food-seeking behavior

Foraging comprises the complete set of activities and behaviors related to
obtaining food in a wild environment. Food-seeking behavior is a particular
element of such set, which includes all re-orientation and locomotion activity
related to the obtention of food. Thus, food-seeking behavior stops when a
given food-resource is found, whereas foraging behavior is still present in
future utilization of acquired energy, including feeding or possibly hoarding
[@V3Z2UVAU#Kramer_2001].

The food-seeking phase of foraging must ensure an optimal way to aquire food
using the least amount of resource and reducing exposure to potential
predators. If food-resources location where to be static, food-seeking behavior
only necesary input would be an initial sampling of the environment, and then
matching landscape cues, this is not the case. Animals do not necessarily
follow landscape cue [@9XCDNBAM#Bartumeus_Etal_2016], or even develop search
strategies based on them [@BWKDXXFW#Kölzsch_Etal_2015]. Moreover, animals are
subject to incomplete knowledge about resources location, quality and
probability of obtention [@ZD73QGIR#Pyke_1984 ]. Thus a foraging animal must
determine its food-seeking behavior considering an inherently stochastic
environment with only partial knowledge.

In a stochastic environment, in order to to establish optimal food-seeking
strategies, animals should consider the overall statistical properties of the
environment, otherwise, local environment volatility could lead to the
misguided preference for lower mean quality food resources with high
variability, which could lead to starvation in the long run. Empirical evidence
has shown that multiple animal species, including humans, perform search in a
Lévy-walk fashion [@7YQKP7Z2#Garg_Kello_2021; @I2BS842S#Reynolds_Etal_2018;
@TPRPLPEC#Viswanathan_Etal_1996; @BWKDXXFW#Kölzsch_Etal_2015]. Lévy-walks are
random walks with a Lévy which produces heavy-tails, and describes multiple
concentrated movements with sharp turning angles, followed by few ballistic
displacements, such pattern produces optimal searches in a wide variety of
environments were resources are dispersed in a patchy-fashion
[@97UESCC6#Wosniack_Etal_2017], although its generative mechanism is not clear
[@I2BS842S#Reynolds_Etal_2018] there is evidence that this mechanism is
partially independent of sensory information [@M5RXPXSZ#Humphries_Sims_2014;
@5WUMQR2H#Sims_Etal_2019], probably selected through evolution as it optimizes
food searching with partial or complete lack of knowledge
[@97UESCC6#Wosniack_Etal_2017].

Given that this food-seeking strategies are present without sensory
information, and are ubiquitous in animals, food-seeking behavior probably
evolved to deal with partial knowledge in uncertain environment. While,
Lévy-walks provide a 'basal' strategy when there is partial or no knowledge, it
is known that upon food encounter or sensing search strategy switches to a more
focused one similar to brownian-motion [@5KMWW8NS#Reynolds_Frye_2007;
@F9HICU4A#Nauta_Khaluf_Simoens_2020]. Furthermore, computational modeling
points how this switch between informed (brownian-like) and random search might
be dependent on food encounter uncertainty
[@3YWCKUUK#Anselme_Otto_Güntürkün_2017]. Together this data suggests that
animals food-seeking behavior evolved to deal with uncertain environments and
partial knowledge. Moreover environment uncertainty itself modulates the
baseline strategy, thus allowing to optimally search for food even when
knowledge is not complete.
